---
layout: default
title: "BIO304: Human Physiology"
course_description: "A study of the physiological processes that occur within the human body, with particular attention on enzyme activity, cell signaling, metabolic processes, protein synthesis, and movement."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "BIO304: Human Physiology"
----------------------------------------------

Human physiology is the study of the body’s processes, also known as
functions. You already have experience with this subject, because you
are a human and perform numerous functions each day to maintain your
body’s balance or homeostasis. For example, gas exchange in your lungs
provides the body’s cells with adequate oxygen supply needed to survive
and carry out metabolic processes. Digestion of food components in your
mouth, stomach, and small intestines breaks larger substances into
molecules that can be absorbed in the small intestines and used for
energy. White blood cells attack foreign bodies, such as bacteria and
cells containing viruses to keep you free from infection. As you might
expect, an understanding of physiology is paramount if you wish to
pursue studies in health care, development, or even behavior. A doctor
needs to understand how to relate a urine sample to kidney function. A
nurse needs to know the importance of electrocardiogram results and
heart activity. A medical laboratory scientist needs to relate blood
enzymes to disease states, such as anemia or diabetes mellitus. No
matter what your role is in medicine, you must know how the body works
and what happens when it does not function appropriately. In this
course, we will look at each organ system in detail and then discuss the
ways in which these systems interact in order to maintain overall body
functioning. Metabolism and homeostasis – or the maintenance of the body
at a set, optimal level – will be important themes found throughout the
units. We will accordingly discuss metabolic processes at length from
the cellular to the organismal level. Although this course will focus on
the function (physiology) of the human body, it is necessary to have a
good grasp of anatomy in order to fully understand function. We will
briefly review the anatomy of each organ system before studying the
systems themselves. If you would like to get more information or review
the anatomy of each system, please refer to [BIO302: Human
Anatomy](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio302/). As we work through this
course, the importance of the structure-function relationship between
anatomy and physiology will become apparent. Keep thinking about how
anatomy (structure) is important to physiology (function). Why are the
valves of the heart only one way? Why are muscle cells long rather than
round? These kinds of questions should be asked and answered as you move
through this course. This is an advanced course and therefore mastery of
lower level pre-requisites is imperative. You should have a good
understanding of material covered in [BIO101A: Introduction to Cellular
and Molecular Biology](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio101a/) or
[BIO101B: Introduction to Cellular and Molecular
Biology](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio101b/) and [BIO302: Human
Anatomy](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio302/) as this course builds on
what you have already learned in those courses. It is also recommended
that [CHEM101: General Chemistry
I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem101/) is taken prior to this course
as an understanding of molecules is important in physiology. Finally, in
order to practice what you learn in this course in a more hands on
manner, the [BIO304L: Human Physiology
Lab](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio304-lab/) is a co-requisite and
must be taken at the same time as this course.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:

-   describe the relationship between structure and function at the
    cellular level, and relate dysfunctional states of health to
    problems at the cellular level when appropriate;
-   given relevant physiological information, explain the physiological
    mechanisms involved;
-   describe the concepts of homeostasis and feedback control in
    relationship to each organ system;
-   use vocabulary of physiological terms, and demonstrate an ability to
    communicate efficiently in a medical environment; and
-   describe techniques currently in use that measure the function of
    organ systems.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course you must:  
  
 √    have access to a computer;  
  
 √    have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash);  
  
 √    have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt,.xls, etc.);  
  
 √    be competent in the English language;  
  
 √    have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf);  
  
 √    have completed the following courses from [“The Core
Program”](http://www.saylor.org/majors/biology/) and [“Electives”](http://www.saylor.org/majors/biology/) sections
of the Biology major: [BIO101A: Introduction to Cellular and Molecular
Biology](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio101a/) or [BIO101B:
Introduction to Cellular and Molecular
Biology](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio101b/) and [BIO302: Human
Anatomy](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio302/).  The following course
is recommended: [CHEM101: General Chemistry
I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem101/); and  
  
 √    be taking the lab associated with this course
concurrently: [BIO304L: Human Physiology
Lab](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio304-lab/).

### Course Information

Welcome to BIO304! General information about the course and its
requirements can be found below.  
  
 **Primary Resources:** This course is comprised of a range of different
free, online materials. However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:  

-   Wikibooks’ [*Human
    Physiology*](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Human_Physiology/The_Immune_System)
-   Wikibooks’ [*Structural
    Biochemistry*](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Structural_Biochemistry)
-   Khan Academy’s [Human
    Biology](http://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/human-biology)
    Videos

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials in
the order they are presented. Pay special attention to Units 1 and 2 as
these lay the groundwork for understanding the more advanced,
exploratory material presented in the latter units. You will also need
to complete assessments for each unit as well as the Final Exam.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the assessments and resources in each unit.  
  
 In order to “pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
  
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of **115.5**
**hours** to complete. Each unit includes a “time advisory” that lists
the amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit. These
should help you plan your time accordingly. It may be useful to take a
look at these time advisories and to determine how much time you have
over the next few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for
yourself. For example, Unit 1 should take 4.5 hours to complete. Perhaps
you can sit down with your calendar and decide to complete subunit 1.1
(a total of 1.5 hours) on Monday night; subunit (a total of 3 hours) on
Tuesday night; etc.  
  

